Hi, and welcome to this video about
choosing the right AI architecture.
cue-2
As an AI product manager, selecting the
right architecture is a critical step in
cue-3
building an AI application. You will often
need to choose between three main
cue-4
approaches:
cue-5
retrieval-augmented generation,
cue-6
fine-tuning,
cue-7
and agentic workflows. This decision
matters because it directly affects
cue-8
development cost, system latency, and the
overall user experience. Since every
cue-9
product has different constraints, your
goal is to evaluate these trade-offs and
cue-10
choose the approach that best aligns with
your needs. Choosing the wrong
cue-11
architecture can lead to high costs or a
system that fails to meet user
cue-12
expectations.
cue-13
At a high level, the difference between
these approaches comes down to three
cue-14
things: where knowledge comes from, how
reasoning happens, and how much control
cue-15
you have over the system's behavior.
cue-16
A simple way to remember them is this:
cue-17
RAG looks it up, fine-tuning memorizes it,
and agentic workflows think through it.
cue-18
Let's start with retrieval-augmented
generation, or RAG.
cue-19
With RAG, the model retrieves information
from an external source, such as documents
cue-20
or a knowledge base, and then uses that
information to generate a response. You
cue-21
can think of it as search combined with AI
explanation.
cue-22
RAG is often attractive because it is
faster to build,
cue-23
easier to update, and lower cost than
other approaches. If your content changes
cue-24
frequently, you can update the knowledge
source without retraining the model. This
cue-25
makes RAG a strong fit for systems that
rely on up-to-date or domain-specific
cue-26
information.
cue-27
However, RAG also has limitations.
cue-28
Its performance depends heavily on the
quality of retrieval. If the wrong
cue-29
information is retrieved or if the task
requires deeper reasoning, the response
cue-30
may be shallow or inconsistent.
cue-31
As a result, RAG works best for FAQ
systems, knowledge-based chatbots, or
cue-32
assistants that primarily reference
external content.
cue-33
Next is fine-tuning.
cue-34
Fine-tuning improves the model itself by
training it on a specific data set.
cue-35
Instead of retrieving information each
time, the model learns patterns directly
cue-36
from examples. In simple terms,
fine-tuning teaches the model how to
cue-37
respond.
cue-38
This approach is useful when you need
consistent tone, stronger domain
cue-39
expertise, or tighter control over
outputs. For example, if you want an AI
cue-40
tutor to consistently follow a specific
teaching style, fine-tuning may be more
cue-41
effective than RAG alone.
cue-42
However, fine-tuning requires high-quality
label data, more development effort, and
cue-43
higher upfront cost. It is also less
flexible when requirements change.
cue-44
Fine-tuning is best suited for specialized
products, branded assistants, or systems
cue-45
that require consistent behavior.
cue-46
Finally, there are agentic workflows. With
agentic workflows, the system breaks
cue-47
tasks into multiple steps. It can plan,
use tools, evaluate intermediate results,
cue-48
revise its output, and then produce a
final answer.
cue-49
Instead of responding all at once, it
works through a structured process. This
cue-50
makes agentic workflows especially
powerful for complex multi-step tasks that
cue-51
require deeper reasoning and greater
control. For example, in a tutoring
cue-52
system, an agent can guide a student step
by step rather than jumping straight to
cue-53
the answer.
cue-54
The trade-off is that agentic workflows
are slower, more complex to build, and
cue-55
more expensive to run.
cue-56
So how do you decide?
cue-57
In practice, there is no single best
approach. In many cases, you may even
cue-58
combine methods. For example, you might
use fine-tuning to control tone while
cue-59
using RAG to provide up-to-date
information or use an agentic workflow to
cue-60
manage more complex reasoning on top of
retrieval. Understanding how these
cue-61
approaches can work together allows you to
build more flexible and effective
cue-62
systems. But even with these options,
making the right decision can be
cue-63
challenging. When you're balancing cost,
speed, and quality, it's easy to rely on
cue-64
intuition or incomplete information.
cue-65
To make this process more systematic, we
use the EVAL framework.
cue-66
The EVAL framework provides a structured
way to evaluate these trade-offs and make
cue-67
decisions based on data instead of
intuition. There are five stages in the
cue-68
EVAL framework.
cue-69
Stage one, setup,
cue-70
is where you define what success looks
like by creating a clear rubric for the
cue-71
LLM judge and a test data set for the AI
system, so the system's outputs can be
cue-72
evaluated by the LLM consistently and
automatically.
cue-73
Stage two, audit, is where human
evaluators review and verify the LLM's
cue-74
judgments to make sure the evaluation is
accurate and aligned with your goals.
cue-75
Stage three, diagnose, is where you
analyze the evaluation results from LLM
cue-76
Judge based on the rubric and data set to
identify the root cause of the system's
cue-77
failures rather than just observing
surface-level issues.
cue-78
Stage four, decide, is where you select
the best solution based on your diagnosis
cue-79
while balancing important trade-offs like
quality, speed, and cost.
cue-80
Stage five, optimize, is where you make
the solution workable at scale by
cue-81
improving its cost structure and
evaluating whether it is sustainable in
cue-82
production.
cue-83
Together, these five stages guide you
through a complete structured process for
cue-84
improving AI systems using data instead of
guesswork.
cue-85
Now, let's begin.